**Project - Todo List**

  

> **Tech Stack**

**1. Backend**

The backend is written in Javascript on Node.js with express. The Database used is MongoDB on MongoDB Atlas Cloud, the database is connected to the Node Server using Mongoose Package. CORS is used for accepting requests from the React App. BodyParser is used for ease in requests and response management. JWT is used for authentication token generation.

  

**2. Frontend**

The frontend is written in Javascript with the React library. I used MUI Core for the components and MUI Icons for icons. Axios for making requests to the backend server. I used [Coolors](https://coolors.co/) for generating a colour palette. I used Figma for creating the logo file and then used a png to ico converter for generating an icon file.

  

> **Document Schema**

They are contained under the “models” folder inside the Backend folder. There are two collections “users” and “todos”.

**User Schema**

1.  Name: String
    
2.  Email: String and Unique
    
3.  Password: String
    

  

**Todo Schema**

1.  Title: String and Required
    
2.  Description: String
    
3.  IsCompleted: Boolean and default:false
    
4.  Creator: Object Id from the users table
    
5.  Category: String
    
6.  CreatedOn: String
    

  

> **Backend Explanation**

The main backend file is the index.js in that first all imported all the required packages and document schemas. Then I connected it with MongoDB. There are several endpoints:-

1. /register
	POST
	Function - To Register
	It takes the name, email and password in the request body, then creates a new user.
	Sends back a 400-Bad Request response when some error occurs.
	Sends back a 200-OK response when the user is successfully created.
2. /login
	POST
	Function - To Login
	It takes in the email and password in the request body, then finds a user based on the 		 email address.
Sends back a 500-Internal Server Error response when some error occurs.
Sends back a 400-Bad Request response when email doesn’t exist in any document.
Sends back a 401-Unauthorised response when the password doesn’t match.
Sends back a 200-OK response when email and password matched in the document, along with a token generated by JWT which contains the user._id in the response body.
3. /todos
GET
Function- To Get all the todos.
It takes the token in the header of the request, then fetches all the todo documents with creator as the user._id decoded with JWT.
Sends back a 401-Unauthorised response when the JWT verify function throws an error.
Sends back a 400-Bad Request response when some error occurs during searching the collection.
Sends back a 200-OK response along with the fetched todos in the response body.
4. /todo
POST
Function- To create a new todo.
It takes the token in the header of the request and title, category, description and createdOn in the body of the request. First, it checks the token using the JWT and if it true token it sends the request to create new todo in the document.
Sends back a 401-Unauthorised response when the JWT verify function throws an error.
Sends back a 400-Bad Request response when some error occurs during adding the document.
Sends back a 200-OK response along with the newly created todo in the response body.
5. /done/:todoId
PUT
Function- To mark a todo as done.
It takes the token in the header of the request and todoID in the request parameter. It first verifies the token using JWT, then searches for a todo with creator as the decoded userID from the token and _id as the todoID in the Todo Collection, then puts the isCompleted as true in the fetched document and saves the document.
Sends back a 401-Unauthorised response when the JWT verify function throws an error.
Sends back a 400-Bad Request response when some error occurs during saving the document.
Sends back a 200-OK response when the todo is marked completed.
6. /delete/:todoID
DELETE
Function- To mark a todo as done.
It takes the token in the header of the request and todoID in the request parameter. It first verifies the token using JWT, then deletes the todo with creator as the decoded userID from the token and _id as the todoID in the Todo Collection.
Sends back a 401-Unauthorised response when the JWT verify function throws an error.
Sends back a 400-Bad Request response when some error occurs during the deletion of the document.
Sends back a 200-OK response when the todo is deleted successfully.
7. /edit/:todoID
PUT
Function- To edit a todo.
It takes the token in the header of the request, todoID in the request parameter and all the details of the todo in the request body. It first verifies the token using JWT, then searches for a todo with creator as the decoded userID from the token and _id as the todoID in the Todo Collection, then puts the details of the todo in the document and save it.
Sends back a 401-Unauthorised response when the JWT verify function throws an error.
Sends back a 400-Bad Request response when some error occurs during the searching and updating the document.
Sends back a 200-OK response when the todo is updated successfully.
(This function is not implemented in the front-end).

> **Frontend Explanation**

The App.js file is the file in which all the routes are added. There are three routes ‘/’,’/register’, ‘/todo’.

The ‘/’ is the landing page, it links to the login page, initially, it checks whether the token exists in the local storage if it exists then it redirects it to the ‘/todo’ page and if it doesn’t exist it renders this page. This page was created by editing the mui template. It has a form that asks for the E-mail Address and Password. Once you fill in the fields and click the login button, it makes a post request to the backend using Axios. If the response from the server is 200, it sets the token in the local storage and redirects to ‘/todo’ otherwise it creates an Alert.

The ‘/register’ is the registration page, it links to the register page, initially, it checks whether the token exists in the local storage if it exists then it redirects it to the ‘/todo’ page and if it doesn’t exist it renders this page. This page was created by editing the mui template. It has a form that asks for all the required details. Once you fill in the fields and click the Register button, it makes a post request to the backend using Axios. If the response from the server is 200, it redirects to ‘/ otherwise it creates an Alert.

The ‘/todo’ is the main page, it links to the main app page, initially, it checks whether the token exists in the local storage if it exists then it renders this page or else it redirect to the ‘/’. It mounts the Header Component, Summary Component. In the Header Component, there is a button to log out, which deletes the token from the local storage and redirects to the ‘/’ page. First, all the todos are fetched from the server using an Axios request. Then it is stored in the state.

The Summary Component takes in the number of todo and the number of completed tasks. It then renders the cards containing the details about the number of todos, how many are completed and how many are pending, to give a gist.

The todo component renders todoCard for each of the objects in the todoList. It checks the category of the todo - “Personal”, “Home”, “Work” or “Others” and renders an Avatar accordingly. The colour of the Avatar and its background depends on the isCompleted attribute.

There are two buttons on each card, one to mark the task as done, and the other to delete the todo. The Mark as done button sends a request to the backend on ‘/done/:todoId’. The Delete button sends a request to the backend on ‘/delete/:todoId’.

The todo Component also contains a FAB which opens a Modal to create a new todo. There is a form in the modal with text fields for title and description and a select component for choosing the category and on pressing the create button it sends a request on ‘/todo’ with all the required data on getting a success it takes the returned todo and adds it to the todoList.

> **Features**

-   Completely Responsive
	-   It renders the todo component with accordions inside which summary and tasks are collapsed when the width of the device is less than 600px.
    -   The Login and Registration page also renders just the form on the mobile devices making it lightweight and responsive.
    

-   Authentication
    -   To make the app secure, only you can access your todo, and make changes to them.
    
-   Todo Category
    -   Todos can be categorized in various ways to make them more useful. Each Category and completion status gives a different look to the avatar making it visible differently.
    
-   Summary
    -   It is generated to give a brief about the scheduled tasks.
    

-   Persistent State
    -   All the Data is stored in MongoDB to make it permanent.
    

  

> **How to Run the App?**

1.  Replace the MongoDB connection url with the 10th Line of index.js file(“/todo/Backend/index.js”).

2.  Open the terminal and run the “npm i” command in the “/todo/Backend” directory.
    
3.  Run the “npm run dev” command in the same directory “/todo/Backend”.
    
4.  Open a new terminal and run the “npm i” command in the “/todo” directory.
    
5.  Run the “npm start” command in the same directory “/todo”.
    

  

Following these steps will run the server and the web application on your computer.
